---
layout: post
title: 'Macaw - The Code-Savvy Design Tool'
---

**Update:** Macaw has just launched version 1.5 and these are some of the new features:

### States
*Quickly add hover, active and focus states for any element.*

Seriously? In `1.5`? This should have been part of `1.0`!

### Display Toggling
*Take control of an element's display and visibility properties for smart, responsive design.*

Once again, a `1.0` feature that was actually demoed in one of their videos but never worked.

### Rich Text
*Create and style nodes for total control of your text.*

Yeah, the lack of text options was painful. Also a `1.0` feature.

Maybe `1.5` is the new `1.0`?

---

*I wrote this in another blog post but decided to give it its own page after downloading the latest version, 1.0.12 and trying to use it once again. I figured, maybe now it's matured enough where it's actually useful. I needn't have bothered, it just hung on me while trying to paste some lorem ipsum text from the internet (I couldn't remember the way to use the built-in generator). So it seems it's still useless.*

This is by far the worst offender of all the Kickstarter projects I've backed.

[Macaw](http://macaw.co/) was supposed to be the next great thing in web design, it promised to be the Photoshop of web design, the holy grail of web design, a WYSIWYG tool that actually worked, that wrote correct code and respected web standards and that allowed you to create a web site completely in a visual form; no code writing, no fighting with any CSS styles or javascript.
It sounded too good to be true. I should have known. When things sound too good to be true they usually are and Macaw is no exception, in fact it's pretty useless.

That's a pretty strong word to use for a new piece of software: *useless*, especially one that the developers have, apparently, worked so hard on. Let me explain.

I was really excited about Macaw, I've been making websites on and off for about 17 years, since 1997 more or less when I created my first website with a text editor of some kind. In those 17 years I have not found a really decent WYSIWYG web editor that would actually work as advertised. Back in the old days there was **Go Live** before Adobe bought it and, like everything Adobe touched after 2001, ruined it, turned it to shit. I can't remember the name of the company but I bought a copy of this out of my own pocket (the company I was working for wouldn't pay for it, even though I'd promised to build their website for them which wasn't even in my job description, cheap bastards) and used it extensively, even to make the website for the cheap bastards I was working for at the time, it was great, not the holy grail of web editors but pretty close. Then, as I say, Adobe bought it and ruined it. So I turned to Macromedia Dreamweaver, once again, before Adobe bought it and, you guessed it, turned it to shit.

By the way, how was it possible for Adobe to buy their only competitor, Macromedia, and then destroy its apps? In a country where monopoly is supposed to be illegal, how was that possible?

Politics aside, Dreamweaver was destroyed by Adobe, they still sell it but it's an overpriced piece of shit. What's a web developer to do?

I tried everything else out there, from the Open Source Bluefish, Mozilla, Eclipse, Apatana, etc to the funkier apps like Rapidweaver and even Apple's short-lived iWeb thing (was it called iWeb? I can't remember). None of them were satisfactory. So it was with a heavy heart that I went back to coding everything by hand. This is a very tedious, sad and depressing thing to do. Sure you feel all powerful because you have full control of your code, nobody can sully your beautiful code with weird inline styles and other crap, I'm looking at you Dreamweaver, but it is repetitive, grinding work, especially when you have to write a fucking javascript mouseover effect for the 500th time!

So you can imagine how excited I was about Macaw, I gave my $99 bucks to them and waited. At first with bated breath, then with a little resignation.

Finally, version 0.6 was delivered to us Kickstarter backers, oh such joy. It wasn't bad, it was actually quite impressive. I mean it was very limited and half the stuff that was in there didn't work, but the **promise** of it was awesome. It wrote nice code, albeit funky, but nice code. But it wasn't all unicorns and rainbows, every element had its own styling, which is very heavy handed and a nightmare to maintain or edit, and positioning was either relative or absolute, it was full of bugs and crashed s lot, but hey, it's a `0.6` version, c'mon what do you expect?

Then version 0.7 came out, fixed some stuff, but still every element had its own style, still no real way to share styles between pages, still full of bugs, hmmm... but hey, `0.7` right? Not done yet, don't be so quick to judge.

`0.8` fixed more stuff, still every element with its own style, no way to share styles between pages, bugs, uh... Ok, don't despair, let's wait for version `1.0` shall we?

0.9 changed a bunch of stuff which sounds good, right? 0.9, almost ready for prime time. But it changed things so much that you couldn't open any of your Macaw projects, you had to recreate them all from scratch! WTF? But hey, that's what you get for playing around with a non-release software right? They told you it was beta and subject to change so don't bitch too much.

Alright, so finally version `1.0` comes out and everyone is excited, I get an email saying to upgrade now, of course I'll upgrade now, *what do you think I've been waiting all this time for?* So I upgrade and... I can't even access the application. I mean, I'm locked out, can't use it. WTF? Turns out I have to update my Kickstarter license or some shit but there are no instructions anywhere on how to do it. I send an email to support and after about an hour of uncontrollable rage I give up and go to sleep.

Next day I get an email from the Macaw guys saying I should update my license, an email, by the way, that should have been sent before the one about upgrading, right? OK great, I can finally use the program I paid good money for. Click on the link, it says, and your license will be magically updated and everything will be right with the world, I click the link, no dice, I have to fill out a form, OK, fill out the form, it says my license has been updated, super. Go back to the program, nope, your password is incorrect. Shit. Try again, and again, and again. Nothing, no way to get into the fucking program at all. I can't even get the trial version working for fucks sakes!

So, more emails to Tech Support, no answers, can't get the damn thing to work. I give up again and go to sleep. Two days later, I get an email from support, nothing they suggest works. Finally at the end of the day we get the thing working. So after all this struggling I can use the software, finally, the coveted `1.0` version, this is going to be awesome.

I try to make a website, not even a website, a single web page with 2 links in the top and an image in the middle. Nothing could be simpler than this. It doesn't work. I create some text next to the right margin, Macaw says it's `20 pixels` from the top, fine. I copy that text and create the second link right next to it about `30 pixels` to its right. Weirdly, Macaw says this one is `-33 pixels` (that's negative 33 pixels) from the top, *what the fuck?* The baselines are aligned, how can one be `20 pixels` from the top and the other one be `-33 pixels`? But who cares, right? It's a WYSIWYG, as long at the page looks good, who cares what the code turns out like? Well, I care, I want good code, not shitty code that is later going to come back and bite me in the arse. But right now, to get this far I've been fighting with it for about an hour so I don't care, I just want to be able to create this fucking web page. So I just ignore it and plunge ahead.

I add an image to the middle of the page and the rightmost link, the one that was `-33 pixels` from the top jumps out of its container and lands a bunch of pixels below where it used to be and now says its `-77 pixels` from the top. I never touched the bastard, was nowhere near it, all I did was add an image to the middle. I move it back up with the mouse and it jumps back down, over and over again. Then I try moving it with the cursor keys, hey, great it stays in its place. Alright. Let me add some text to the bottom of the page. Boom, the fucker jumps down again, bastard!

Long story short, after another 40 minutes of fighting with the program I cannot get the link to stay where it needs to, it's just not possible.

I finally give up on Macaw, once again, and do it all from scratch by hand. It takes me 10 minutes to create that web page by hand-coding everything. It took me almost 2 hours fighting with Macaw and I was not able to make it work. Oh, and did I mention that version `1.0` *doesn't even have a manual of any type?* All it has are some videos on the Macaw website, most of which apply to pre `1.0` versions where things were quite different so are not much use.

So, yeah, overall not great. I wouldn't say it's disappointing, I'd say it's useless. If I can't use the program to create a simple website then guess what? It's useless.

Maybe in another year it will be somewhat useful, for now it's a waste of time and money.
